h2. Getting Started

h3. Installing (Mac OS X)

Make sure you have XCode installed. Download the most recent Erlang source code from <http://www.erlang.org/download.html>.

	pre. wget -c http://www.erlang.org/download/otp_src_R12B-5.tar.gz
	tar -xzf otp_src_R12B-5.tar.gz
	cd opt_src_R12B-5
	./configure --prefix=/usr/local
	make
	sudo make install

h3. Starting the shell

Codes can be typed right into the *shell*; to start it, just execute the command @erl@.

	pre. $ erl 
	Erlang (BEAM) emulator version 5.5.1 [source] [async-threads:0] [hipe] 
	Eshell V5.5.1 (abort with ^G)

Only expressions can be executed; you can't type things started by hyphens (such as @-module@ or @-export@).

h4. About shell

The Erlang shell has a built-in line editor.

	pre. Command                 Description
	--------------------------------------------------------
	Ctrl+A                  Beginning of line
	Ctrl+E                  End of line
	Ctrl+F or right arrow   Forward character
	Ctrl+B or left arrow    Backward character
	Ctrl+P or up arrow      Previous line
	Ctrl+N or down arrow    Next line
	Ctrl+T                  Switch last two characters
	Tab                     Expand module or function name

When isn't responding, type @Ctrl+G@; you can then type some commands. Type @h@ to view the available options.
	
	pre. $ erl
	Erlang (BEAM) emulator version 5.6.5 [source] [smp:2] [async-threads:0] [kernel-poll:false]
	__
	Eshell V5.6.5  (abort with ^G)
	1>
	^G
	User switch command
	 --> h
	  c [nn]            - connect to job
	  i [nn]            - interrupt job
	  k [nn]            - kill job
	  j                 - list all jobs
	  s [shell]         - start local shell
	  r [node [shell]]  - start remote shell
	  q                 - quit erlang
	  ? | h             - this message

To clear all variable bindings, just execute the command @f()@.
	
	pre. 1> X = 1.
	1
	2> X = 2.
	**exception error: no match of right hand side value 2
	3> f().
	ok
	4> X = 2.
	2

You can clear a specific variable binding:
	
	pre. 5> f(X).
	6> X.
	*1: variable 'X' is unbound

h3. Simple expressions

	pre. 1> 1 + 1.
	2
	2> (3 + 2) * 4.
	20

p(note). The dialog starts with @1>@; this means that a new Erlang shell has been started. When an expression has been finished, the
dialog will be increased (like @2>@ and so on).

Calculation with large numbers:

	pre. 3> 1234567890 * 987654321 * 9192939495969798.
	11209193004028605797078206136056620

Integers using base 16 and base 32 notation:

	pre. 4> 16#cafe * 32#sugar.
	1577682511434

h3. Variables

Variables must start with an uppercase letter.

	pre. 1> X = 1.
	1
	2> Name = "Nando Vieira".
	"Nando Vieira"
	
Erlang has *single assignment variables*; this means that you can set the value once, changing from being *unbound* to *having a value*.

	pre. 1> X = 1.
	1
	2> X = 2.
	**exception error: no match of right hand side value 2

The @=@ sign is a *pattern matching* operator, which behaves like assignment when you have an unbound variable.

The *scope* of a variable is the place where it was set. If @X@ is used inside a function, then this function is its scope. If @X@ 
occurs in different function, the all the values of @X@ are different.

h4. Pattern Matching

In Erlang, @=@ denotes a *pattern matching*; @Lhs = Rhs@ means: evaluate the right side (@Rhs@) and then match the result against
the pattern on the left side (@Lhs@).

A variable, such as @X@, is a simple form of pattern. The first time a variable is assigned, as in @X = SomeExpression@, Erlang binds
@X@ to the value of @SomeExpression@, so the statement becomes valid. The expression @X = AnotherExpression@ will succeed only if
@SomeExpression@ and @AnotherExpression@ are identical.

	pre. 1> X = (2+4).
	6
	2> Y = 10.
	10
	3> X = 6.
	6
	4> X = Y.
	**exception error: no match of right hand side value 10
	5> Y = 10.
	10
	6> Y = 4.
	**exception error: no match of right hand side value 4
	7> Y = X.
	**exception error: no match of right hand side value 6
	
The expression @2+4@ was assigned to @X@, and the answer was @6@. Then @10@ was assigned to @Y@. When we try to evaluate @X = Y@, 
the match fails and then error message is printed.

h3. Floating-Point Numbers

	pre. 1> 5/3.
	1.6666666666666667
	2> 5 div 2.
	2
	3> 5 rem 3.
	2
	4> 4/2.
	2.0
	5> Pi = 3.14159.
	3.14159
	6> R = 5.
	5
	7> Pi * R * R.
	78.53975

On Erlang, the operator @/@ always returns a float. Floating-point numbers must have a decimal point followed by at least one digit. The
expressions @N div M@ and @N rem M@ are used for integer division and remainder.

h3. Atoms

*Atoms* are constants that represents non-numerical values like @true@, @false@, @ok@ and @error@; they're similar to Ruby's symbols. 
They're started by lowercase letters, followed by alphanumeric characters, underscore or at sign, like @december@, @test123@, 
@some@host@, @a_long_name@. Atoms can also be quoted with a single quotation mark; then you can create atoms like @'Name'@, @'+'@,
@'*'@, @'an atom with spaces'@, @'name'@.

The value of an atom is the atom itself, which will be printed on the shell.

	pre. 1> name.
	name
	2> name = 'name'.
	name

h3. Tuples

*Tuples* are immutable lists. They're used to group a fixed number of items into a single entity. Tuples doesn't have keys, so is 
recommended to use an atom as the first element, describing the tuple.
	
	syntax(erlang). P = {person,
			{name, "Nando Vieira"}
			{blog, "http://simplesideias.com.br"}}.

h4. Extracting values from tuples

To extract values from tuples you need to do pattern matching. Let's extract the name and blog values.

	syntax(erlang). {_, {_, Name}, {_, Blog}} = P.
	
The @_@ symbol is called *anonymous variable*; you can have several occurrences of it in the same pattern.

h3. Lists

*Lists* can store variable number of items. The first element of a list is called *head*. If you remove the *head* from the list, you 
have the *tail* of the list; that is, the remaining items. Here's what a list looks like:

	syntax(erlang). ThingsToBuy = [{apples, 10}, {pears, 6}, {milk, 3}].
	
If @T@ (tail) is a list, then @H|T@ (head and tail) is also a list. The vertical bar @|@ separates the head from its tail. When creating
lists like @[...|T]@, make sure you create *properly formed* lists; that is, @T@ needs to be a list. Otherwise you'll have a
*improper list* that won't work for most library functions.

You can add more elements to the list with the syntax @[E1, E2, ..., En|T]@.

	syntax(erlang). ThingsToBuy = [{apples, 10}, {pears, 6}, {milk, 3}].
	ThingsToBuy1 = [{oranges, 12}, {newspaper, 1}|ThingsToBuy]

h4. Extracting elements from a list

As always, you need to do some pattern matching operation.
	
	syntax(erlang). ThingsToBuy = [{apples, 10}, {pears, 6}, {milk, 3}].
	[Apples|RemainingThingsToBuy] = ThingsToBuy.

The matching above will bind @Apples => {apples, 10}@ and @RemainingThingsToBuy => [{milk, 3}, {pears, 6}]@.

You can extract several values at once and set a new variable with the remaining items.

	syntax(erlang). ThingsToBuy = [{apples, 10}, {pears, 6}, {milk, 3}, {newspaper, 1}].
	[Buy1, Buy2|RemainingThingsToBuy] = ThingsToBuy.
	
Now, @Buy1 => {apples, 10}@, @Buy2 => {pears, 6}@ and @RemainingThingsToBuy => [{milk, 3}, {newspaper, 1}]@.

h3. Strings

*Strings* are just a list of integers quoted with @"@. Here's a sample:

	pre. 1> Name = "Nando Vieira".
	"Nando Vieira"
	2> NickName = [102, 110, 97, 110, 100, 111].
	"fnando"
	3> [1, 2, 3].
	[1,2,3]

The third expression was printed as it is because @1@, @2@ and @3@ are not printable characters. To know which integer represents a 
character, just use the @$@ symbol like in @$a@.

	pre. 1> $a.
	97
	2> $A.
	65

If you mix printable with non-printable characters, Erlang won't convert the list.

	pre. 1> [$a, 1].
	[97,1]

p(note). In Erlang, remember that single quoted strings are just *atoms*; so @'a'@ is not @"a"@.

You can even use a different character set in strings. The Swedish name @Håkan@ will be encoded as @[72,229,107,97,110]@.

h3. Comments

Comments in Erlang start with @%@ and extend to the end of the line. There are no block comments.
	
	syntax(erlang). % this is just a comment
	X = "Some string".
	
Sometimes @%%@ is used to comment out the code; this is recognized by Emacs and enable the automatic indentation of commented lines.
