h2. Sequential Programming

h3. Modules

*Modules* store all the functions you write and need to be saved in @.erl@ files. All modules need to be compiled to '.beam'
%{Beam is short for Bogdan’s Erlang Abstract Machine; Bogumil (Bogdan) Hausman wrote an Erlang compiler in 1993 and designed 
a new instruction set for Erlang.} files before you can use it.

Create a new file @geometry.erl@.
	
	syntax(erlang). -module(geometry).
	-export([area/1]).
	__
	area({rectangle, Width, Height})  -> Width * Height;
	area({circle, Radius})            -> 3.14159 * Radius * Radius. 
	
	
The keyword @module@ defines a new module named @geometry@. The @export@ clause says what functions are being exported; the @[area/1]@ 
notation defines the function name and how many arguments are expected (_arity_). To export several functions, you can do this:

	syntax(erlang). -module(some_module).
	-export([func1/1]).
	-export([func2/1]).

Or this:

	syntax(erlang). -module(some_module).
	-export([func1/1, func2/1]).

If you want to export all module functions, you can use @-compile(export_all)@.

	syntax(erlang). -module(some_module).
	-compile(export_all).

The @area@ keyword defines the function name. In the example above we have two @area@ _clauses_; think of it as 
"method overriding":http://rubyurl.com/7Epb based on pattern matching. Clauses must be 
separated by semicolons (@;@), and the final clause must be terminated by a dot-whitespace.

Let's try it out. From the shell, execute the command @c(geometry)@. You'll probably receive this error:

	pre. 1> c(geometry).
	./geometry.erl:none: no such file or directory
	error

This error will occur if you're trying to compile a module but the file is not present; you must be in the wrong directory or the file 
hasn't been created yet. Check the current directory with @pwd()@.

	pre. 1> pwd().
	/Users/fnando
	ok
   
You can quit the shell and go to the source directory, or you can execute @cd(<path>)@.

	pre. 2> cd("/Users/fnando/Sites/github/notes/erlang/code").
	/Users/fnando/Sites/github/notes/erlang/code
	ok

Try to compile the module once again.

	pre. 3> c(geometry).
	{ok,geometry}

The compiler has returned @{ok, geometry}@, which means that the compiler has succeed and the module @geometry@ has been compiled and
loaded. You can now execute the functions you created:

	pre. 4> geometry:area({rectangle, 10, 5}).
	50
	5> geometry:area({circle, 6}).       
	113.09723999999999

Let's extend our module by adding a square to our geometry module.
	
	syntax(erlang). -module(geometry).
	-export([area/1]).
	__
	area({rectangle, Width, Height})  -> Width * Height;
	area({circle, Radius})            -> 3.14159 * Radius * Radius;
	area({square, X})                 -> X * X.

The order of the clauses doesn't matter; this is possible only because the patterns are mutually exclusive. Remember to set the correct
order you expect to be executed when you cannot create exclusive patterns.

h4. Information about the module

When you create a module, the compiler inserts two special functions automatically: @module_info/0@ and @module_info/1@. These functions can be called to retrieve information about the module such as available functions and attributes.

	syntax(erlang). string:module_info().
	string:module_info(functions).

Check it out the description and available keys:

* @attributes@: Return a list of @{AttributeName, ValueList}@ tuples. This list will be empty if the module has been striped out with "beam_lib":http://erlang.org/doc/man/beam_lib.html#strip-1.
* @compile@: Return a list of tuples containing information about how the module was compiled. This list will be empty if the module has been striped out with "beam_lib":http://erlang.org/doc/man/beam_lib.html#strip-1.
* @imports@: Always return an empty list. The imports key may not be supported in future release.
* @exports@: Return a list of @{Name, Arity}@ tuples with all exported functions in the module.
* @functions@: Return a list of @{Name, Arity}@ tuples with all functions in the module.

h3. Back to Shopping

Let's go back to the shopping list below:

	syntax(erlang). [{oranges,4}, {newspaper,1}, {apples,10}, {pears,6} ,{milk,3}]

Suppose we'd like to calculate total price. Create the module @shop@ for this.
	
	syntax(erlang). -module(shop).
	-export([cost/1]).
	__
	cost(oranges)     -> 2;
	cost(newspaper)   -> 3;
	cost(apples)      -> 4;
	cost(pears)       -> 5;
	cost(milk)        -> 6.

The function @cost@ is composed by 5 clauses. Let's test it:

	pre. 1> c(shop).
	{ok,shop}
	2> shop:cost(oranges).
	5
	3> shop:cost(apples).
	2
	4> shop:cost(xbox360).
	**exception error: no function clause matching shop:cost(xbox360)

Now, we need to calculate the total price from a given list. Here's how you can create the @total@ function. Add the code below to the 
@shop.erl@ file.
	
	syntax(erlang). -module(shop).
	-export([cost/1]).
	-export([total/1]).
	__
	cost(oranges)     -> 2;
	cost(newspaper)   -> 3;
	cost(apples)      -> 4;
	cost(pears)       -> 5;
	cost(milk)        -> 6.
	__
	total([])         -> 0;
	total([{Product, Quantity}|T]) ->
	  cost(Product) * Quantity + total(T).

The @total@ function expects a list as argument; if an empty list is provided, then we return @0@; otherwise we retrieve the first
product tuple, do some basic calculation (@cost(Product) * Quantity@) and sum the total from the remaining items (tail).

Recompile the @shop@ module and calculate a shopping list:

	pre. 1> c(shop).
	{ok,shop}
	2> Buy = [{apples, 2}, {newspaper, 1}, {milk, 3}].
	[{apples,3},{newspaper,4},{milk,5}]
	3> shop:total(Buy).
	29

h3. Functions with the same name and different arity

The *arity* of a function is the number of arguments that the function expects. In Erlang, functions with the same name but different
arity are *entirely* different. This is what Erlang programmers do to create *auxiliary functions*. Create a new file named @misc.erl@.

	syntax(erlang). -module(misc).
	-export([sum/1]).
	__
	% main function
	sum(L)  -> sum(L, 0).
	__
	% auxiliary functions
	sum([], N)      -> N;
	sum([H|T], N)   -> sum(T, H+N).

Note that we are exporting only the function @sum(L)@.

h3. Funs

*Funs* are just anonymous functions.

	pre. 1> Double = fun(X) -> 2*X end.
	#Fun<erl_eval.6.13229925>
	2> Double(3).
	6
	3> Double().
	**exception error: interpreted function with arity 1 called with no arguments

They can have any number of arguments.

	pre. 4> UserInfo = fun(Name, Age) -> io:format("~s has ~p years-old~n", [Name, Age]) end.
	#Fun<erl_eval.12.113037538>
	5> UserInfo("fnando", 29).
	fnando has 29 years-old
	ok

They can have multiple clauses.

	pre. 6> Temp = 	fun({c, C}) -> {f, 32 + C*9/5};
	6>			   ({f, F}) -> {c, (F-32)*5/9}
	6>			end.
	7> Temp({c, 33}).  % from C to F
	8> Temp({f, 115}). % from F to C

Functions can accept funs as arguments or return funs as result. They're called *higher-order functions*.

h4. Functions that accept funs as arguments

The standard library @lists@ have many functions whose arguments are funs. Here's a example using the function @lists:map@:

	pre. 1> Double = fun(N) -> N * 2 end.
	#Fun<erl_eval.6.13229925>
	2> lists:map(Double, [1,2,3,4,5]).
	[2,4,6,8,10]

Here's another example using the function @lists:filter@:

	pre. 1> Even = fun(N) -> (N rem 2) =:= 0 end.
	#Fun<erl_eval.6.13229925>
	2> Even(1).
	false
	3> Even(2).
	true
	4> lists:map(Even, [1,2,3,4,5]).
	[false,true,false,true,false]
	5> lists:filter(Even, [1,2,3,4,5,6]).
	[2,4,6]

h4. Functions that return funs

Functions can also return _funs_.

	syntax(erlang). Fruits = [apple, pear, orange].
	MakeTest = fun(L) -> (fun(X) -> lists:member(X, L) end) end.
	IsFruit = MakeTest(Fruits).     % #Fun<erl_eval.6.13229925>
	IsFruit(lemon).                 % false
	IsFruit(orange).                % true

